Professor Katz, tell us about how the entry of
women affected
Texas A&M women's students. Well, I think that had
considerable, that happened, that came about
much more smoothly than the matter of dropping the
core as a requirement. When the girls first came
in, why they came in is they had to be the wife of a GI,
or the wife of any student, of course, or they'd be
in the family of some professor or employee of the
state. And then it got to where they... I think they
actually had a lawsuit that never came to trial,
but
if it was good for... If it was good for this young
lady because of her circumstance of being born in
the right family or married to the right fellow,
why, here's another one over here equally
deserving, they think, and why couldn't she go?
Why should she have to travel over to Sam Houston or
some other place? So they put the heat on and
brought the wide-open...
admission of coeds. Did you have many female
students in your engineering classes? A few, yes.
How did their performance measure against their
male counterparts? By and large, they were above
average.
Like spatial abilities supposedly attributed to
females didn't enter in? In my opinion, the bulk of
them wouldn't undertake engineering unless they
had excelled in their high school work. They were
above average students or they would not have
tackled engineering. And they were still above
average students.
I
had a few. What do you think was the reason for such
small numbers of black students enrolled in
engineering? Well, it's preparation.
Preparation. One, they would get in and a lot more
started than stayed.
By and large, they would avoid engineering
because the propaganda was that this is a real
difficult course. You've got to have
mathematics, you've got to do this, you've got to
do that. You've got to speak thermodynamics
in order to succeed in engineering. And they would
take the path of least resistance, either go to
prayer with you or go to work. And a little later on,
they'd get in the Army. You mentioned that while
you were at A&M from 58 to 76, most of your time was
put into heavy teaching loads rather than the
research. Do you think that the trend has changed
too much as for professors to spend more time on
research than they do on teaching? Yes. Do you
think that can be detrimental to a university?
That's a moot question. Research works. if
associated with teaching, can very much improve
teaching. For instance, my teaching down at Kelly
Air Force Base, I was teaching...
I was teaching metallurgy here, and I was teaching
metallurgy down there. Well, the people I was
teaching down there were the people that were
actually doing the metallurgical work, working
in the metallurgical laboratory And when they had
failures on aircraft, they would bring the parts
in there to be examined. Why did this fail? And then
I was giving them a general background so that they
would know not only how something failed, but why.
Why the material was treated as it was and how it
might have been otherwise. heat-treated or
alloyed or whatnot. And the association I had
there very much enriched the classes that I taught
here, because I had examples. I would bring pieces
and parts up there and show them, and you get the
attention when you do that.
It's not just something out of the book. What
about, can some research though be detrimental as
far as teaching goes? If a fellow gets himself in a
bind in research, most all of that has got to, they
have to make proposals, and they have deadlines on
getting those proposals in, and they have to work,
work, work day and night to make the goals on
getting the proposals in. And when they're
working 15 hours a day on that, they're not going to
work too much on their teaching. They're going to
get by as best they can. And the same thing's true
when they start making their reports and
getting... Or when the research work gets into a
critical phase where they're getting such good
results or bad results, as the case may be,
because... Some research says they yield bad
results. If it's going to be bad, well, you want to
find out.
But there are critical phases in that that make for
neglect of the teaching work. Another thing is
that they put a fellow in and say he's half-time
teaching and he's half-time research. And it
turns out both of them are about a three-quarter
time job.
Because as a half-time researcher, he's got the
same kind of reports that a full-time researcher
has. He's got the same kind of proposals to write
up. As a teacher, he's got the students coming in
for contact, for help. He's got the same
extracurricular things to look out for that a
full-time teacher has. And it turns out that a half
and half deal is about a three-quarter and
three-quarter, and that turns out to be about a job
and a half. And I stand to be corrected on that. I've
done some research for it, by the
way. As you end your teaching career at A&M, how do
changes occur as far as job opportunities for
graduates over the years? Oh, there's an ebb and
flow. you spoke of that you graduated in 1970,
there was a low in employment opportunities along
about then. Well, by the time I retired, there was,
all they had to do was have your name on a diploma,
and it was a choice of jobs. And it's still that way,
although I understand. A good engineering
student has a typical four, five, or six, or as many
offers as he's able to interview and solicit.
It is cyclical, and sometimes the need for more
engineers and less engineers. Right now, the
economic situation is such that these companies,
they're still hiring, but they're cutting back on
the numbers that they hire right now. And that may
serve to throttle a number of people who take
engineering. And eventually, when the economic
situation comes into full bloom again, Then,
there may not be as many engineers as there is
opportunities to go to work. It cycles that way. I
don't know what we can do about it. Russia hadn't
figured out a good thing except to have too many
engineers. Oh, Russia has too many? Oh, they have
an enormous number of engineers.
Japan, as little as it is, graduates more
engineers, I think, than the United States does.
And the bulk of these foreign students that come in
here take engineering. Aren't they mainly
subsidized by their governments, the ones that
come in? Well, too many of them are subsidized by
our government. How's that?
Oh, one... one deal or another. See, after all, I
worked on this Foreign Service thing for four
years, and I was personally instrumental in
sending a number of people over here for higher
education, they called it. And the ones I sent over
were under a contract they had to go back. But their
way was paid over here by the American government
under our foreign aid program.
And a lot of those countries,
although they pay the students way over here,
they're getting foreign aid from the United
States
in a treasury to treasury situation. And part of
the thing is that they send that people over here
for education. What was your experience as an
engineering faculty member regarding
international students? Were they any different
than regular American students? Well, of course,
various ones of them have various language
problems. And according to where they came from,
they had The reality of engineering facts or
equipment or machinery and all,
they had not been exposed to it. It had been
something that was academic.
Getting them to put their hands on the stuff and
really get with it was a little more difficult, but
by and large, most of them who come are superior
students. They've got a good mind.
You get them to get their hands dirty or something
else. Not
really. Not really. I've had some of them try.
And some of them may have gotten away with it more
than I think they got away with.
Do you ever see any of your farmers used to say, do
you go somewhere, go to Houston or Dallas, do you
ever run into them constantly? Some of them come
here sometimes.
I see my old students all the time. When I go to
meetings like the American Society of
Engineering Education or the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, meetings like that, I
always run into my old students. While you were at
university, were you ever under any pressure to
work on a doctorate? Yeah, well, yes.
The reason I had to make a choice between accepting
an associate professor promotion, which was
timely and I thought deserved and they thought
deserved and so forth, if I had accepted that, Then
I would bar myself from getting a PhD at A&M.
That restriction. Now, on that, I had some 24 hours
to order a PhD or beyond a master's at that
particular time. Also, that opportunity to go
overseas occurred about that same time. And
either I accepted those two things and got on with
what I was doing, or I chucked the whole works there
and refused the promotion and refused the
overseas assignment and concentrated on the PhD.
While you were there, was there a lot of pressure
for faculty members to publish their findings?
Oh, yes. But I got around that by actually doing it.
You remember the book by Virgil Boring-Ferris
called Thermodynamics? Or the one called FAIRES?
Or the one in machine design? textbook by Ferris.
He also wrote a book on mechanics.
He was a very prolific writer and a prolific
researcher at the library level and he I helped him
revise a mechanics book, and I revised about 1,600
problems in that book. I added new ones and so
forth. So, the publication business I got around
there. At least when I retired, when I got
Professor Emeritus. When did A&M become a
publisher-parish institution as it is today?
Oh, I would say back through the 50s, 50s and 60s,
the 60s more particularly.
And you remember when you said you got out in 1970?
And along then, why, there was a lull in
opportunities to go into engineering or hiring
The numbers being hired was much less and the
salaries offered was much less. Along about that
time, the academic institutions, A&M being one of
them in particular here, they were able to go in and
force their faculty to do writing do research and
whatnot, because they had such a high and
privileged job. And to hold that, they must excel.
And that of excelling was they must get the name
before the public and research and write.
And the pressure came. The pressure on that came
right along with it. Now, if you'll check up right
now, there's been a lessening of that pressure
because right now there's a scarcity of people in
the engineering teaching profession. Scarcity
in engineering, not in other fields. No. And with
that scarcity, you won't hear the wheels squeak on
that publish or perish There's
some other area, Professor Katz, that you could
elaborate on that might be of interest
to this interview or
this interview.
Oh, I think that some of the young faculty we have
now come to us with their PhDs, their expertise,
their know-how in the use of certain experimental
equipment. They come to us and one of the first
things they must do is to carry on their research
work and to carry on their research work they must
have some of that particular experimental
equipment. Most of it's expensive. Whereas, the
equipment that's already on hand might be able to
do the same job, but these young experts don't know
how to use this other equipment. But they want
something on which they are the expert. And that is
an expensive proposition from the standpoint of
money, the standpoint of building use, the
standpoint of utilization of equipment that's
already on hand. And those same people tend to have
an inferiority that they hide.
don't want to get into an area in which they are not
expert. After all, they have a PhD. And they hate to
admit they don't know something. So they go around
trying to confine themselves to teaching a very
few courses and using a relatively limited
variety of equipment and doing a limited variety
of research work. And they're unfairly limiting
themselves because they're afraid somebody will
say he doesn't know everything. An old-timer like
me that taught 28 different courses in my time,
when they needed a course taught, if I knew
something at all about the field, I got with it and
dug it out. I've taught some courses I never had.
That's correct.
That's correct. Has this made cost of engineering
research much higher than it could be otherwise?
And with the scarcity of faculty applications,
why these applicants come in and they demand that
they be permitted to do research in this
particular field. They teach these particular
courses. They must teach graduate courses. And
most of them, a lot of those that are teaching a
graduate course would fall on their face trying to
teach the undergraduate course that backs up that
graduate course. What do you mean by that? Well,
the most difficult courses in engineering are not
the graduate courses. They're the undergraduate
courses that are the foundation, the
fundamentals for those graduate courses. You
mean it's possible to teach some of the more
advanced courses without really knowing those
fundamentals? Have them really taught those
fundamentals. And when you have not taught a
course, old father time comes in and takes away
your expertise if you ever had any
yeah
i found that when you teach something you have to
learn it
What I had asked earlier regarding this type of
attitude toward my faculty members, does this
increase the cost of engineering research and
what it would be otherwise, the requirement for
special equipment and so forth? It increases the
cost of teaching. It increases the cost of some of
those faculty members, the younger faculty
members are promoted. on the basis of their, well,
on the basis of need, really. You need somebody,
and you've got to have, you've got so many
applicants, and they won't come unless he gets an
associate or an assistant professorship, or some
of them demand that if they've got a little
experience, they may only come in as a full
professor. And the only way you can get them is to do
that. And those Those things are not in an orderly
step-by-step process. Of course, on the other
hand, you can go for years and years, and a fellow
stay in grade and use him up. I probably had a life
full of experience in that line. I taught courses
that full professors taught, and I was an
associate professor for a long time there until,
of course, I retired as a professor emeritus. But
the salary was kind of low in that job.
All honors.
well with all these changes then what you're
implying or at least what i'm inferring is that the
quality of the teaching has not changed in the last
30 years only the research may have souped up the
progress but this really hasn't been that much
change in the quality of teaching is that true and
you find another thing they when there's been so
much stuff added in the last You're given any
number of years you please to call out. Five years,
10 years, or 50 years. We're doing things now. We
have levels of technology, expertise in
mathematics and computer work and so forth now
that didn't exist then. Now, if they're going to
teach about those things,
What are they going to leave out?
It accumulates like history.
Something has to be left out.
When I was a student, 1928 to 1932, we didn't have
any jet engines. We didn't have any rocket
engines. Only rockets and fireworks. We didn't
have any radar. We didn't have any antibiotics. We
didn't have any...
When I get my mind to it, I can name about 10
different major fields. There was no digital
computer.
The digital computer had just not been conceived
at that time. And the slide rule didn't go out of
style until a year, 10 years, 10, 15 years ago,
about 10 years ago.
And when you bring in the teaching of all of these
new things, somehow you must. And now they're
telling us they must get into the field of robots.
And if you're going to teach all about robots, why,
that's something extra. What are you going to
leave out?
A four-year college course is still a four-year
college course. And I'll cite one more thing. When
I was a student, we had 18-week semesters.
Now... You don't have over about 15 weeks of actual
classwork, and not even that in the fall semester.
15 weeks of actual classwork.
The time applied has decreased. The number of
student credit hours that a student takes has
decreased.
And the number of weeks it takes has decreased, and
at the same time, the amount of information that he
needs to gather has exploded.
Consequently, I'd say that when a fella gets his
degree,
nowadays, he's in a position to learn something
about whatever work he goes into. So he won't know
what you're buying. Looking back on your long
teaching career, Professor Cassidy, have you
ever regretted coming to A&M back in 1932? No,
never. 28, rather? No, never. Never regretted it?
You must not have got to go back to Mississippi too
much back in the 30s. No, I didn't. My freshman
year, I went back at the end of the whole year. Then
on I went home on Christmas, but that's all.
Hitchhiking back home? Yeah. Back then it was easy
to hitchhike, compared to now. Yeah, it was. When
did it become so difficult to hitchhike? Thugs.
When? About what time?
The 60s or 50s? I guess some of that coincides with
all of the Berkeley activities. where they no
longer, a student was no longer
recognized as a person following an honorable,
with honorable intentions.
But back in my day, people picked you up, glad to
pick you up if you have company on a long trip. No
problem.
Well, it
may be about time
for me to get back to my retirement. I didn't think
of anything in particular. What were you doing in
retirement, by the way? Were you doing anything in
particular? Well, for about the first four years
of that period, I did considerable consulting. I
did some consulting long before I retired. I went
to consulting about more so than the research
route. I was working on real problems for real
people, and not on something hypothetical.
I could get all of the research work I could handle
and would either go into it as a full business or
when I found out that I would have to keep the same
set of books as though I were General Motors or
something, on withholding tax,
the workman's compensation, social security
deductions. He had to keep all of those books and
all. If a fella doesn't have a pretty sizable staff
the way he has a secretary who does the bulk of all of
that filing work for him, You have to have a pretty
big operation or else confine yourself to a
strictly one-man operation. And I throttled back
after that. And then, after so long a time, I had a
heart attack and that throttled it back. I still do
a little research. I mean, still a little
consulting. When did you have your appointment?
In September of 79.
Looking back on it, not necessarily from an
engineering standpoint.
There was July.
Looking back on your life, Professor Cassidy,
Could you say, has there been any particular
decade in which you've been alive that you thought
was better than the other decades, not
necessarily
related to engineering? The 60s could have been. I
think maybe the 50s were. You think the 50s were a
better time to live in than
the 80s? Well, now, in the 80s, right now, it all
depends. The people that have jobs, that have a
living, insurance somehow, they're doing fine.
But the people that are unemployed, they're not
doing so well. What do you think is the cause of the
high rate of unemployment? Do you think there's
any one single cause?
We can't go along with an unbalanced budget year
after year after year, getting worse and worse and
more worse without the chips falling someplace.
Furthermore, In our foreign trade, we have had a
deficit. Foreign trade now, year after year after
year, and when you buy more than you sell, foreign
countries. I think that even includes the
giveaways.
You can't do that without some time or another,
otherwise the chips are going to fall. and they're
falling right now. Do you think there's any
solution to the economic problem today? They've
got to cut out all this throwing money. They've got
a problem, what do they do? They throw money at it
just like you're throwing baseball. Some people
claim that too much has already been cut out of
things and delivered today.
I think some of those same people get out and go to
work, why, that would help solve the problem too.
I would like to see a little Americanism preached.
I got a son, we got a son that has a Datsun pickup. I
call that a Pearl Harbor pickup.
Sometimes
it's an illusion that the foreign product is
better. Just wait until that day comes around when
you need to repair it.
sometimes that's a real illusion right i've heard
some people say that i've heard others
say that until
we have a balance and what we take in and what we
spend. The government's no different than what
you are or what I am. Well, you think that President
Reagan probably is on the right track. He's trying
to be.
He's never going to pull any Congress to deal with.
Congress more nearly than the Senate.
I'm a recipient of Social Security. But if they
keep on increasing the Social Security with this
so-called consumer price index route, it is going
to exponentially
It will go beyond all imagination. There's no way.
I think that probably more than anything else,
maybe the cost of living increases coming on that.
Like you said, an exponential increase. I think
it's nearly double what it was 10 years ago. The
cost of living goes to all of the government
employees. It goes to all
of the
It goes to all of us. It goes to all retirees
in the military. It goes to all the active duty in
the military. It goes to all of the bureaucrats.
And one of the bureaucracies is the worst thing in
the world that we've got. You get a little pimp
going here, and it wants to enlarge itself, king
the belly. Well, we've kind of gotten off the topic
there quite a ways with engineering. Is there
anything else you want to say before we close? No,
but when you go to other institutions, you can come
back and take pride in A&M is what it is.
Thank you very much for spending the afternoon
with us, Professor Cass. I enjoyed visiting with
you. Appreciate your time.